India is a democratic country and importance of election in a democratic country could never be neglected. Elections in India play a very vital role in the country’s politics and its overall growth and development. During the British rule, India was under the Constitutional Monarchy of the British Queen and did not have any self government. However after the independence it became a democratic republic country with a government which is chosen through the hands of its citizen.
The major types of elections which are held in India are Presidential, Lok Sabha (General Election), Rajya Sabha, State Legislature and local body. The elections in which the public is directly involved are the General Elections (MP) and State Legislature Assembly (MLA) for the election of Prime Minister and Chief Minister of state, respectively.
Election Commission of India is the apex autonomous electoral agency of India which is involved in supervising and administering the complete election process. It is entrusted with the responsibility of providing constitutional status to the political parties, completing nomination process, implementing Model Code of Conduct, taking care of complete voting process, result declaration as well as ensuring free, fair and transparent election process.
The election process in India starts with the declaration of the election dates followed by filing of nomination by the candidates which is scrutinized and accepted by the election commission. The voting is conducted on the election date in the respective constituencies through Electronic Voting Machines (EVM). Any Indian citizen who has attained the age of 18 years having a valid proof of identity can cast his vote in the election. The votes are counted on the result declaration day and the candidates with higher number of votes are declared winner.
Election in India is considered as the festival of democracy because this is the day which gives immense power to the public to exercise their voting right which could change the destiny of a nation. Elections are also a platform on which a voter sees a new light of hope to strengthen the country and a ray of nation building.
